# 1979

## VisiCalc: User-Defined Problem Solving Package

- 1979-06-11 - The Intelligent Machines Journal (InfoWorld) - Issue 9
- [page 22](https://books.google.com/books?id=Gj4EAAAAMBAJ&lpg=PA22&dq=visicalc&pg=PA22#v=onepage&f=true)
- > VisiCalc, soon to be announced by Personal Software, Incorporated, is an interactive program designed to solve problems that require manipulating rows and columns of numbers.
- > Bob Frankston, one of VisiCalc's authors, likens it to a **"magic sheet of paper that can perform calculations and recalculations"** automatically, once certain data relationships are defined.
- > VisiCalc makes a computer's display screen act as a window onto an imaginary sheet of paper where rows and columns of numbers can be written. The user can move this window to any part of the "sheet" to view different parts of his data. Within the window, he can add, change, delete, copy, and move numbers or blocks of numbers.
- > The user can tell VisiCalc that certain entries have a constant relationship to one another. If he is creating a budget sheet, for example, he can stipulate that the last entry in each column should be the total of the entries above it. **VisiCalc not only calculates the total, but recalculates it automatically whenever an entry in the column is changed.**
- > VisiCalc has provisions for labeling rows and columns; defining entry formats (such as dollars and cents); and splitting the screen into two windows which can be moved independently. Other facilities, such as creating bar charts, are also available.
- > The key to VisiCalc's design, its authors say, is to give the user a highly flexible tool that he can use as he wishes. "VisiCalc allows the user to just solve the problem using familiar tools and concepts," says Frankston. This is in contrast to using a canned program that has a fixed idea of how one should go about budgeting.
- > **Frankston likens VisiCalc to the pocket calculator, which has gained wide acceptance because it aids people in solving problems in their own way.**
- > The formal introduction of VisiCalc is scheduled for the National Computer Conference, being held June 4-7, in New York City. The program will become available a few weeks later from Personal Software and through retail computer stores. The program was demonstrated to retailers at the Fourth West Coast Computer Faire, but was not disclosed to the public.
- > **The initial offering of VisiCalc will be for the Apple II computer, will require 32K of memory, and can use disk or tape for saving data files, but does not require them.** Versions for other machines will follow, first within the 6502 family, and later outside of it. The price of VisiCalc has not yet been determined, but is expected to be under \$100.

## West Coast Computer Faire

- 1979-08-00 - Byte - Volume 4 - Number 8
- Carl Helmers
- [page 156](https://archive.org/details/byte-magazine-1979-08/page/n155/mode/2up?view=theater)
- > one of the most exciting items seen at the recent West Coast Computer Faire. This item is a whole new language for interaction with computers at an intellectual user's level. As a tool for use with computers, this language-like method of structuring an interface is completely orthogonal to any conventional sequential language from BASIC to Pascal, although its conceptual underpinnings are very LISP-like. The product has roots in the artificial intelligence community, and it is a direct result of the programming efforts of two gentlemen with strong ties to the MIT computer science scene, Dan Bricklin and Bob Frankston. It is presently available on the Apple-II computer, and will soon be available on Atari, Pet and IRS-80 computers.
- > Dan and Bob have formed a firm of their own called Software Arts Inc. Their only customer is Personal Software, a company formed last year by another graduate of the Cambridge computer scene, Dan Fylstra (along with Peter Jennings of Microchess fame). The Personal Software company distributes this new product exclusively, at retail cost and through manufacturers. The product is called "Visi-Calc." The first "public" showing of Visi-Calc occurred last May in the form of a hospitality suite at the Fourth West Coast Computer Faire in the San Francisco Convention Center. The display was oriented to dealers and manufacturers. Advertisements have appeared earlier this year, and we should see more detailed publicity by the time of this issue.
- > The same technique can be applied to many programming tasks of an ad hoc nature; for personal, business, engineering and scientific applications. The software handles strings as well as arithmetic data and includes a full set of engineering and scientific functions such as the transcendentals used in the above example. Visi-Calc has to be one of the neatest software innovations of 1979, if not the most fundamental new concept to date in the personal computing field. It will certainly be used as a practical piece of software by many of our readers with various mass-marketed small computers.
- > An interesting comment was noted by authors Bricklin and Frankston and relayed in a recent conversation with Dan Fylstra of Personal Software. The comment was that the techniques used in Visi-Calc are possible only when a full processor is totally available to one user as a personal computer. The calculational bandwidth required to support this sort of technique is impossible to find at reasonable cost in a traditional large computer time sharing system. It only works when the concept of "one user, one processor" is employed, ie: when the computer power is "personal." As part of VisiCalc's authors' experiences at MIT over the past decade, they often had this kind of relationship with traditional main frame computers like PDP-10's and IBM 370's. Such excessively expensive computing power devoted to one user is not possible outside of a research context. With the coming of the current age of microcomputing however, the personal (one user, one processor) approach is possible on a wider and less expensive scale. The products that are now available in this market for under \$3000 are getting very close to the level of power which was restricted to research laboratories. Software products like Visi-Calc take advantage of this.

## The Visible Calculator

- 1979-10-00 - Popular Mechanics - Volume 152 - Number 4
- Neil Shapiro
- [page 149](https://books.google.com/books?id=Z88DAAAAMBAJ&lpg=PA49&dq=visicalc&pg=PA49#v=onepage&q&f=true)
- > I was recently allowed to preview **a software program that (in my opinion) will revolutionize personal computing.** With VisiCalc and a home computer, **everyone (not just professionals) will be able to custom-design his own specialized computer programs.**
- > VisiCalc puts on the screen any section of a grid of about 300 by 300 blocks. Any block, and its relationship to any other block, can be instantly entered by plain English and mathematical formulas. If you want block B1 to be labeled "Profit," you can define it in terms of cost and selling price, or whatever you would like.
- > **If you change a variable, say percent of interest in a savings account, every figure dependent on that variable instantly changes.** Think of all the "what-ifs" you can check out quickly: What a rent increase will do to your family budget; what varying Dow Jones averages could do to your stock portfolio; how changes in wholesale prices will affect your business statement. Possibilities are endless.
